Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we are going to make our bowling ball just a little bit more pretty so that it looks
more like a decent bowling ball as you can see here.
This is one of the many options that we could go for but they will all look roughly the same at the
end anyway.
So let's go find out some more.
OK were back over with our messy looking ball here.
Let's see if we can do something to fix the shading.
First of all we need to understand why the shading is being horrible like this.
And it's simply because blender is doing its best to smooth shade.
The entire object and we've put in a 90 or over 90 degree bend that's a problem.
If you go more than 90 degrees and try and smooth shade it blender just doesn't know how to do it properly.
So you end up with this of artifacting on a model.
So how can we go ahead and sort of fix that.
Well the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to set up a camera zoom in here and come back out
again so we can find a good angle to work with about there maybe I'm having trouble.
There we go.
Better use the mouse wheel to slow down the progression.
Now one thing to bear in mind is if you come this close and see your model you are zoomed in massively
so you will see any little artifacts that are happening.
Okay.
So the first thing that I want to do here is just render out the base so I know what it looks like and
it looks horrible.
Okay.
What else can we do.
Well let's go into Slot Two and just close that down.
Then when we render the next one it will be in Slot Two.
We'll go to slot 3 etc. as we go so we can compare the different options.
Okay.
So the first one I want to do is work on the shading itself at the moment blenders being told to smooth
shade everything.
Is there a way that we can start controlling that.
Well there is underneath the mesh data properties.
So if we go with the bowling ball selected go to the mesh data properties scroll down a little bit more
and go to the normals tab drop that down and we have also smooth.
And that means that anything greater than 30 degrees will be flat shaded.
So if I increase that we find that the inside goes.
Which perfect.
And then eventually we'll get to a point where it goes just like it was before.
So I would say that this is a good halfway house here.
And we've probably got an issue at the bottom.
Yes it's rounded out the the bottom as well.
See if we can increase that slightly and get the bottom back in here we go.
So that's where the bottoms in as well.
So we can see everything going on there.
It doesn't look quite right and that's because it goes smooth and then the sharp angle and smooth again
things don't usually look like that in real life.
And certainly they wouldn't be with this type of top smooth inside.
You couldn't really get away with that.
So the accurate way of displaying that would be like this.
And those don't look like comfortable finger holes.
So I don't think this is going to be the suitable way of going forward.
But that is one way of making sure that you have flat shaded or flat areas and smooth shaded areas on
your model.
Let's render that out.
That's gone on to slots and then slot three skill sets up and ready to render to.
I'll shut that down.
What else can we do.
Well let's turn off auto smooth and go back to this stage.
The next thing that we're going to do is we're going to turn on the modifier.
So we're going to go to the modifiers tab go to the second column which generates geometry and go to
the sub division surface modifier and we'll get a bump that up so maybe two or three levels.
That's going to increase the number of triangles in our scene.
But it's going to give us a good idea of how this looks if it's smoothed out.
The other thing to bear in mind is the render quality of the render quality is lower than the viewport.
You can end up with it looking good in the viewport and then when you hit render it looks a bit ugly.
So now that we've got the subdivision surface modifier setup we can have 12 to give us a starting point
we can see here.
It looks lovely and smooth.
It doesn't have the horrible artifact thing it did before is pinching a little in the middle but that
is to be expected but it's not very well controlled.
So how can we make it a bit neater with out adding extra geometry.
Let's go and select slot four and come back again.
Let's go into edit mode.
I'm going to use the alt key and select the edge loops.
So making sure I'm in edge select around that hole and I've managed to miss it there.
There we go that one there.
Can I deselect.
Perfect.
So we've got these three edges selected.
I'm going to open up the properties panel and the area you want to look for is under edge data.
You want to look at the mean crease level.
If I turn that up to 100 percent or 1 when we go ahead and look at it it will look a lot sharper than
it did before.
And this might be all you want to do.
However if we take a closer look at the model itself just change.
That to slot five.
It looks like we've added a little bit of a lip there as well which is something we perhaps don't want
to do.
So we may want to go back in and let's set at that point eight.
So it's a little bit less and a little bit smoother going round.
I mean this is something you can tweak to your heart's content.
We certainly don't want one.
We may want something above 50 percent by the looks of it.
So maybe point five five let's render that out that's starting to look pretty good.
Let's go to slot 6 and explore another option.
This is what I love about blender.
There's always more than one way to do something.
So we've still got this horrible shading here.
What happens if we add some geometry.
Now I wouldn't go ahead and subdivide the edges even though we could potentially get a round circle
there.
It won't look great overall.
Made that mistake in the past.
So what else can we do here.
Well we could bevel these edges.
So we've gone to the vertex menu before and selected bevel vertices.
However if we go to the edge menu there's an option to bevel edges which is control and B so we do control
and B what we can do is we can widen that out.
We can see it pushes apart almost like an inset either side of an edge and erasing that original edge
and we can make it a bit smoother by using the mouse wheel.
We can add more segments in and of course looking at the bevel modifier we get a similar set of options
to what we had before with the vertex bevel.
What happens if we come out and have a look at it like that.
OK.
So we're still dealing with something quite low poly so if we go ahead and render it we will end up
with artifacting.
Now one thing I want to stress at this point is you will get artifacting when you render a low poly
model with smooth shading turned on you will almost always have some sort of artefact going on which
is why for all of the other exercises we have had turned on the subdivisions surface modified.
Let's see if this makes a difference so if  we go up to a quality level sorry a quality level a render
level of two subdivisions let's see what that looks like.
That looks pretty good as well but that's added extra geometry and has it added to the overall feel
of the model.
I think it has, I'm going to set that up just one level higher and to see if that makes a difference when we
have a look at it here.
Yes yes it does.
And the other thing that we can do and I've seen this on a lot of bowling ball models is now that we
have the extra geometry there and we perhaps didn't need this middle bit so we can go in selecting that
middle bit and once it's selected we can dissolve those edges.
What we can now do is we can assign a material to that face loop that runs around and if we do that
much we will be able to do make sure we can select them is we can have different colored rims around
the holes I've seen that style on a lot of different bowling balls where this area here is colored in
probably so you can see where your fingers are supposed to go on an otherwise spherical object.
So there we go.
They are my top tips on how to make a sharp transition whilst dealing with an
otherwise smooth object.
I quite like this particular one but now it's time for your challenge. Okay so your challenge is to work
on your bowling ball to make the holes look much better than they currently do.
We're mainly focused on that shading artifacts that happen around the holes at the moment.
Now keep the triangle count below 10000.
We don't want to brute force it's by just keep subdividing for instance but do use the subdivision modifier.
If you think that is going to help you out there.
Experiment with different options and pick the one that works for you.
I do want you to be a bit more experimental at this stage I want you to explore the different options
that we've been through perhaps try out some ideas of your own as well and if you've tried something
different than what I've shown you already I'd love to hear about it over in the discussions.
But for the moment pause the video now and give that a go
Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now hop on over into blender and finish off of the holes of our bowling ball okay.
So I'm gonna just revert this back to this horrible state that we were on before.
Now looking at the topology underneath I do really want somewhere that I can have the rings around here.
This is a design decision at this point.
If you were making a model that did not have a colored ring around here you could probably just leave
it.
But I am going to have a colored model and because I'm just working with material colors at the moment
I want to make sure that I can apply it to the surface and I cannot do that unless there's geometry
there to apply it to.
So to begin with the bottom of these holes they're already selected is there something I want to do with
them.
Well to be honest they're out of sight and out of mind.
So I'm going to leave it.
I'm not going to even worry about them, Let's work up the rim of these holes so I'm going to select
the rim of the holes, I am going to bevel.
There we go.
And let's just bring that out to about there I think.
OK.
That's looking good.
Add a subdivision surface modifier and I'm going to add a level of two to the model and that brings
our triangle count to nine thousand one hundred.
So I'm happy with that.
I'm also happy that if.. and we can't look at it directly but I'm going to come into the model here.
I'm happy with the very close up that we've got here where we get a bit too close.
Here we go something like that and render it doesn't look completely smooth around the edge.
You know what I'm happy with that for the moment because it's it's meeting the 10k spec.
The only way I'm going to get that really really smooth around the edge here is to actually increase
the poly count.
I'm going to hide that away for the moment.
I'm just going to play with the other option that we had before under the mesh data properties under
the normals and auto smooth just to see if I can get a neater edge around.
So that's that's a bit too much there.
That's.
Is there an angle of which I can exploit it so I end up with a decent rim around.
So if we turn it up massively we get obviously the whole thing gets this sort mottled effect.
I really want to focus on just one hole there so let's go over and increase it slowly and I believe
I mentioned this earlier on in the course but if I haven't already then you can also hold down the shift
key when you're scrolling and it gives much finer control when you're moving your mouse from the left
to the right.
If you need it so you can see at the point there that's where we start losing all of the extra sharpness
around these holes.
Does that look any good.
The question I would say no in this case I'm not going to go with that look and this is it.
If you're experimenting it's absolutely fine.
And I would always encourage you guys to experiment and just have fun as you go.
So we've got this bit of geometry goes into the model and I'm happy with how that's looking because
we can modify it later on.
So that's coming along really well.
I'm just trying to think if there's anything else I want to add to my ball whilst I'm here.
Otherwise the finger holes themselves are done.
We're getting a triangle count of nine thousand one hundred twenty which I'm happy with.
Coincidentally I did wonder how much it would cost me if these bottom bits which I'm going to have to
go into wireframe mode to select so that bottom bit there that there and that one there perfect managed
select it not too hard, I'm going to delete those faces and come out again.
So it saves us a couple of hundred polygons.
It's not significant and it may cause us an issue if you can see through so i'm going leave them attached
for the moment.
That's pretty cool looking at it like that.
I'm gonna go back into, Lets do  lookdev mode.
It just looks a bit shiny is reflecting the environment that set up I'm liking how that's come together.
Brilliant.
How are you guys getting on.
Which method did you choose do share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next
lecture.